[GONG SOUNDING]
>>Time is a very difficult
thing to pin down.
There's a famous saying of
Saint Augustine of Hippo,
that when he was asked,
what is time, he said,
"I know what it is, but
when you ask me, I don't."
And yet it seems absolutely
fundamental to our life.
Time is money, we say.
I don't have enough time.
Time flies.
Time drags.
And I think we should go into
the question of what this
is, because in our ordinary
common sense, we think of time
as a one-way motion, from the
past, through the present,
and on into the future.
And that carries along
with it another impression,
which is to say that life moves
from the past to the future
in such a way that what happens
now and what will happen
is always the result of what
has happened in the past.
In other words, we seem
to be driven along.
You know, once upon a time it
was fashionable in psychology
for people to speak of man's
and animals' instincts.
That we have, for example,
an instinct for survival,
an instinct to make
love, and so on.
But nowadays, that word
has become unfashionable,
and psychologists tend instead
to use the word drives.
And to speak of
the need for food
as a drive, the need for
survival or for sex as drives.
And that's a very significant
word, because it's brought out,
isn't it, by people
who feel driven.
I must say, personally,
if I feel hungry,
I don't feel driven.
Also, if I feel lusty,
Because I don't say, oh,
excuse me, but I have to eat.
Or excuse me, but
I need to fulfill
my sexual urges, my
biological impulses.
I say, hurray.
I identify myself
with my drives.
They're me.
And I don't take a passive
attitude towards them,
and apologize for them.
So the whole idea
of our being driven
is connected with the
idea of causality.
Of life moving under
the power of the past.
And that is so ingrained
in our common sense
that it's very difficult
to get rid of it.
Because I want to turn the
thing 'round completely
the other way, and
say that the past
is the result of the present.
Let us suppose, just
for the sake of example,
that this universe
started with a big bang,
as some cosmologists believe.
Now, when that bang happened,
it was the present, wasn't it?
And so the universe began in
what we will call a now moment.
Then it goes on doing its stuff.
And always, when any event
that we now call past
came into being, it came
into being in the present
and out of the present.
That's one way of seeing it.
But before we get
further involved in this,
I want to draw your
attention to a fallacy
in the very common
sense idea of causality.
That events are caused by
previous events from which they
flow, or result, necessarily.
To understand the
fallacy of that idea,
we have to begin by asking,
what do you mean by an event?
Let's take the event of a human
being coming into the world.
Now, when does that event begin?
Does it occur at the
moment of parturition,
when the baby actually
comes out of its mother?
Or does the baby begin at
the moment of conception?
Or does the baby
begin when it was
an evil gleam in
its father's eye?
Or does a baby begin
when the spermatozoa
are generated in the father,
or the ovum in the mother?
Or could you say a baby begins
when its father is born,
or when its mother is born?
All these things can be
thought of as beginnings.
But we decide for purposes
of legal registration
that a life begins at the
moment of parturition.
And that is a purely
arbitrary decision.
And it has validity only
because we all agree about it.
Let me show you the same
phenomenon in the dimension
of space instead of
the dimension of time.
Let's ask, how big is the sun?
Are we going to define
the sun as limited
by the extent of its fire?
That's one possible definition.
But we could equally well
define the sphere of the sun
by the extent of its heat.
We could also define
the sphere of the sun
by the extent of its light.
And each of these would
be reasonable choices,
except that it's
rather difficult
to keep track of the
extent of its light
because we are inside it.
And therefore, we
have arbitrarily
agreed to define the sun by
the limit of its visible fire.
But you will see in all
these-- by these analogies
that how big a thing is,
or how long an event is
is simply a matter
of definition.
Now therefore, when
by simple definition,
for purposes of discussion,
we have divided events
into certain periods--
we'll say the first World
War began in 1914,
and it ended in 1918.
Now actually, all those things
which led up to the first World
War started long before 1914.
And the repercussions
of that war
have continued long beyond 1918.
How are we to distinguish an
event from its repercussions?
So you will see that because
we have divided events
from one another in this
arbitrary way, we do that,
and then we sort of
forget we did it.
And then we have a puzzle.
How do events lead
to each other?
Because you see, in reality,
there are no separate events.
Life moves along like water.
And it's all connected,
as the source of a river
is connected to the
mouth and to the ocean.
And all the events
or things going on
are like whirlpools
in the stream.
Because you go there today
and you see a whirlpool.
You go there tomorrow
But it isn't the same
whirlpool, because all the water
is changing every second.
What is happening
is not really what
we should call a whirlpool,
but rather a whirlpooling.
It is an activity, not a thing.
And indeed, every so-called
thing can be called an event.
We call, say, a house housing.
We call a mat matting.
And we could equally
call a cat a catting.
So we could say the
catting sat on the matting.
And we would thereby have
a world in which there
were no things, but only events.
To give another illustration.
A flame is something we say,
there is a flame on the candle.
But it would be
more correct to say
there is a flaming
on the candle,
because the flame is
a stream of hot gas.
Let's take another
amusing example.
We say fist.
And fist is a noun.
And fist looks like a thing.
But suddenly, what happens to
the fist when I open my hand?
See I was fisting,
now I'm handing.
Handing it to you.
So every kind of so-called thing
can be spoken of as an event.
And because events
flow into each other,
the fisting flows
into the handing,
we cannot say exactly where
one ends and the other begins.
So therefore, if
we remember that,
we shall see that we do not
need the idea of causality
to explain how a prior event
influences a following event.
Because it's like this.
Supposing I'm looking through
a narrow slit in a fence,
and a snake goes by.
I've never seen a snake
before, and this is mysterious.
And I see through
the slit in the fence
first the snake's head.
Then I see a long,
trailing body,
and then finally the tail.
And I say, well,
that was interesting.
Then the snake turns
around and goes back.
And again, I see first
the head, and then
after an interval, the tail.
Now, if I call the head one
event and the tail another,
it will seem to me
that the event head
is the cause of the event tail.
And the tail is the effect.
But if I look at
the whole snake,
I will see a head tailed snake.
And it would be simply absurd to
say that the head of the snake
is the cause of the tail,
as if the head came--
as if the snake came into
being first the head and then
the tail.
The snake comes into being
out of its egg as a head
tailed snake.
And so in exactly the
same way, all events
are really one event.
When we talk about
different events,
we're looking at different
sections or parts
of one continuous happening.
And therefore, the
idea of separate events
which have to be linked
by a mysterious process
called cause and effect
is completely unnecessary.
But having thought that way,
we think of present events
as being caused by past events.
And therefore, we tend
to regard ourselves
as the puppets of the past,
as driven along by something
that is always behind us.
Now, to overcome this
impression, it's very simple.
You begin again
with an experiment
which I suggested in a
previous talk about meditation.
Approach the world
through your ears.
If you shut your eyes and
make contact with reality,
purely with your ears-- I
mean, it's kind of silly
perhaps to shut your eyes when
you're looking at television,
but do it just for a moment.
And you will realize that
the sounds you are hearing
are all coming out of silence.
You hear [GONG SOUND],
and it fades away.
Fades, fades, fades, fades,
and finally disappears.
It's a curious world
this, isn't it?
Because you hear all
the realities in it,
the sounds, suddenly
coming out of nothing.
You don't see any reason
for them to begin,
they just appear, and
then they echo way
through the corridors of the
mind which we call memory.
Now, if you open your
eyes, it's a little harder
to see this with your eyes
because unlike sounds, the eyes
sound static.
Or rather, they look static.
Everything looks
still to your eyes.
But you must understand that the
world you are looking at-- say,
when you look at a light.
That light is vibrating.
All material things
are vibrations,
and they are
vibrating at you now
in the same way as the sound
was vibrating on your ears.
In other words, the
present world that you see
is a vibration coming-- just as
the sound comes out of silence,
the light is coming
out of space.
It's coming out of
nothing straight at you
now, and echoing
away into the past.
So the course of
time is really very
much like the course
of a ship in the ocean.
Because here's
the ship, you see.
And it leaves behind it a wake.
And the wake fades out.
And that tells us
where the ship has
been in just the
same way as the past,
and our memory of the past,
tells us what we have done.
But as we go back into the
past, and we go back and back
to prehistory, and we use
all kinds of instruments
and scientific methods for
detecting what happened,
we eventually reach a point
where all record of the past
fades away in just the same
way as the wake of the ship.
Now, the important thing to
remember in this illustration
is that the wake
doesn't drive the ship
any more than the
tail wags the dog.
Supposing there's a
neurotic, difficult child.
And one school of thought used
to say, well, bang him about.
Beat him up.
And maybe he'll change.
But then they said, oh no.
That's not fair to the
child to beat him up
because it was his parents.
They didn't bring
him up properly.
And so then they say,
well, punish the parents.
Well, the parents
say, excuse me,
but our parents
were neurotic too.
And they brought us up badly,
so we couldn't help what we did.
And so since the grandparents
are dead, we can't get at them.
And in any case,
supposing we could,
we would pass the whole
blame back to Adam and Eve
in the Garden of Eden.
And they'd say, they
started all this mess.
But then Eve would say, no.
The serpent tempted
me and I did eat.
And it was the serpent's fault.
Well you know, when God, in the
story of Genesis, asked Eve,
didst thou eat the
fruit of the tree
where of I told thee
thou should not eat?
She said, oh, but the serpent
tempted me and I did eat.
And God looked at the serpent.
And the serpent didn't
make any excuse.
He probably winked.
Because the serpent,
being an angel,
was wise enough to know
where the present begins.
So you see, if you insist on
being moved, being determined
by the past, that's your game.
But the fact of the matter
is, it all starts right now.
But we like to establish a
connectivity with the past,
because that gives other people
the impression that we're sane.
If you ask me then, why am I
talking, well, I could say,
I'm making a living this way.
Or I have a message that I
want to get across to you.
But that is not the reason.
I am talking for the same
reason that birds sing
and for the same reason that
the stars shine, is, I dig it.
Why do you dig it?
Well, I could go on answering
all sorts of questions
about human motivation
and psychology,
but they wouldn't
explain a thing.
Because explaining
things by the past
is really a refusal to
explain them at all.
All you're doing is
postponing the explanation.
You're putting it back and
back and back and back,
and that explains nothing.
What does explain
things is the present.
Why do you do it now?
Now, this is a slight cheat,
because that doesn't explain it
either.
Because what happens now,
just as the sound comes out
of silence, all this
comes out of nowhere.
This is in connection with
what I explained to you
in another talk about
the power of nothingness.
All life suddenly
emerges out of space.
Bang, right now.
And to ask again,
why does it happen,
is an unprofitable question,
because the interesting thing
is not why, but what.
What happens?
Not why does it happen?
I can say, well, I am doing this
now because I did that then.
And so I'm producing for you
a continuous line of thought.
But actually I'm
doing it backwards.
I'm doing it always from
now, and connecting up
what I do now with
what I did so that you
can see a consistent story.
If I define myself as the
whole field of events,
we'll say the organism
environment field, which
is the real me, then all
the things that happen to be
may be called my doing.
And that is the
real sense of karma.
But when we speak about
freedom from karma,
freedom from being the
puppet of the past,
that simply involves a
change in your thinking.
It involves, in
other words, your
getting rid of the
habit of thought
whereby you define yourself
as the result of what
has gone before.
And instead, get into the more
plausible and more reasonable
habit of thought in terms of
which you don't define yourself
in terms of what
you've done before,
but in terms of what
you're doing now.
And that is liberation from
the ridiculous situation
of being a dog
wagged by its tail.